feat(datagrid): initial design guidance for datagrid component (#121)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1008-datagrid-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: approved

> created: 2024-10-22

Reviewer: ```suggestion
created: 2024-12-03
```

Reviewer 2: The updated date has been changed to `2024-12-03`, do we need to update the created date too?

Reviewer: I think both dates should be the date we publish.

updated: 2024-10-24
---

# Datalist Design Guidance

[Datagrid](https://clarity.design/documentation/datagrid) organizes large volumes of data in columns and rows allowing users to scan, compare, and perform other actions.

## Guidance

> - **Must** use a datagrid for structured, homogeneous content, where each object has the same attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **must** contain structured, homogeneous content, where each object has the same attributes.
```

> - **Must** use a datagrid when users need to search, filter, or perform batch operations on the structured data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **must** be used when users need to search, filter, or perform batch operations on structured data.
```

> - **Must not** use to display name/value pairs such as terms and definitions. Consider using a [stack view](https://clarity.design/documentation/stack-view) component instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **must not** be used to display name/value pairs such as terms and definitions. Consider using a [stack view](https://clarity.design/documentation/stack-view) component or a [description list](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dl) instead.
```

We maybe should backlog an issue for description list styling, but I have seen this used in several VCF pages.

Reviewer: Feel free to leave the description list part out for now since we don't have Clarity styling or guidance for it yet.

> - **Must not** use nested datagrid. Placing data grid inside another datagrid impacts performance and increases complexity. **Must** use flat data structure for better performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **must not** use be nested within datagrid cells or expandable rows. Placing datagrid inside another datagrid impacts performance and increases complexity. A datagrid detail pane *may* contain another datagrid.
```

> - Datagrids **must not** use be nested within datagrid cells or expandable rows. Placing datagrid inside another datagrid impacts performance and increases complexity. A datagrid detail pane _may_ contain another datagrid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **must not** be nested within datagrid cells or expandable rows. Placing a datagrid inside another datagrid impacts performance and increases complexity. A datagrid detail pane **may** contain another datagrid.
```

> - **Should** be used to present large volumes of data that doesn't fit on one page. For smaller amounts of data (10 to 20 lines), use a [table](https://clarity.design/documentation/table).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrids **should** be used to present large volumes of data that doesn't fit on one page. For smaller amounts of data (10 to 20 lines), use a [table](https://clarity.design/documentation/table).
```

> - **Should** use a [card](https://clarity.design/documentation/card) for datasets with a blend of text, images, and data visualizations, or content with mixed formatting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Card](https://clarity.design/documentation/card) **should** use a  for datasets with a blend of text, images, and data visualizations or content with mixed formatting.
```

> - [Card](https://clarity.design/documentation/card) **should** be used for datasets with a blend of text, images, and data visualizations or content with mixed formatting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [card](https://clarity.design/documentation/card) **should** be used for datasets with a blend of text, images, and data visualizations or content with mixed formatting.
```

Reviewer: Sorry, this was a mistake in my previous suggestion.

> - **Should** use `pagination` for large datasets, when the comparison of the datasets in different pages is not important and you would like the user to reach a specific page quickly by using the page navigation options (Either by entering the page number or clicking on the following links - Next, Prev, First, Last).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pagination **should** be used when the comparison of the datasets in different pages is not important and you would like the user to reach a specific page quickly by using the page navigation options (entering the page number or clicking on the first, next, previous, or last buttons).
```

> - **Should** use `infinte scroll` for large datasets, when the comparision of the datasets is important and you do not want the focus of the users to shift across the pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Infinite/virtual scroll **should** be used for when the comparison of the datasets is important and you do not want the focus of the users to shift across the pages.
```

> - **Should** use detail pane to show additional details for a record. A detail pane allows you to show the full content of the record in a larger scrollable space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The detail pane **should** be used to show additional details for a record. A detail pane allows you to show the full content of the record in a larger scrollable space.
```

> - The detail pane **should** be used to show additional details for a record. A detail pane allows you to show the full content of the record in a larger scrollable space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The detail pane **may** be used to show additional details for a record. A detail pane allows you to show the full content of the record in a larger scrollable space.
```

> - Datagrid column headers **should** not contain complex content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datagrid column headers **should not** contain complex content.
```

> - **Should** use expandable rows to replace original row data with a customized view or layout that includes most or all of the original row data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Expandable rows **may** replace the original row data with a customized view or layout that includes most or all of the original row data.
```

- **Should** use short headers, one or two words when possible to communicate the essence of what the table column contains.

> - The contents of datagrid cells or column headers **may** be as complex as you need them to be, with nested components and interpolation.

Reviewer 3: Column headers should be the less complex parts of a datagrid.

Reviewer: Yeah, this definitely needs to be changed. Header cells should not have complex content. cc: @jbusta5

Reviewer: This appears to embe fixed now.

Reviewer: This appears to be fixed now.
